*******************************************************************************
[Title:Landor's Cottage]
[Author:Edgar Allen Poe]
[Scanned:*]
[Checked:*]
[ID:*]
[Revision:*]
[Source:*]
[Copyright:Public Domain - Copyright Expired]
[Category:*]
[Abstract:*]
*******************************************************************************




                         Landor's Cottage

               A PENDANT TO 'THE DOMAIN OF ARNHEIM'

     During a pedestrian tour last summer, through one or two of
the river counties of New York, I found myself, as the day
declined, somewhat embarrassed about the road I was pursuing. 
The land undulated very remarkably; and my path, for the last
hour, had wound about and about so confusedly, in its effort to
keep in the valleys, that I no longer knew in what direction lay
the sweet village of B-----, where I had determined to stop for
the night.  The sun had scarcely shone--strictly speaking--during
the day, which, nevertheless, had been unpleasantly warm.  A
smoky mist, resembling that of the Indian summer, enveloped all
things, and, of course, added to my uncertainty.  Not that I
cared much about the matter.  If I did not hit upon the village
before sunset, or even before dark, it was more than possible
that a little Dutch farmhouse, or something of that kind, would
soon make its appearance--although, in fact, the neighbourhood
(perhaps on account of being more picturesque than fertile) was
very sparsely inhabited.  At all events, with my knapsack for a
pillow, and my hound as a sentry, a bivouac in the open air was
just the thing which would have amused me.  I sauntered on,
therefore, quite at ease--Ponto taking charge of my gun--until at
length, just as I had begun to consider whether the numerous
little glades that led hither and thither were intended to be
paths at all, I was conducted by one of the most promising of
them into an unquestionable carriage-track.  There could be no
mistaking it.  The traces of light wheels were evident; and
although the tall shrubberies and overgrown undergrowth met
overhead, there was no obstruction whatever below, even to the
passage of a Virginian mountain wagon--the most aspiring vehicle,
I take it, of its kind.  The road, however, except in being open
through the wood--if wood be not too weighty a name for such an
assemblage of light trees--and except in the particulars of
evident wheel-tracks--bore no resemblance to any road I had
before seen.  The tracks of which I speak were but faintly
perceptible, having been impressed upon the firm, yet pleasantly
moist surface of--what looked more like green Genoese velvet than
anything else.  It was grass, clearly--but grass such as we
seldom see out of England--so short, so thick, so even, and so
vivid in colour.  Not a single impediment lay in the wheel-route-
-not even a chip or dead twig.  The stones that once obstructed
the way had been carefully placed--not thrown--along the sides of
the lane, so as to define its boundaries at bottom with a kind of
half-precise, half-negligent, and wholly picturesque definition. 
Clumps of wild flowers grew everywhere, luxuriantly, in the
interspaces.
     What to make of all this, of course I knew not.  Here was
art undoubtedly--that did not surprise me--all roads, in the
ordinary sense, are works of art; nor can I say that there was
much to wonder at in the mere excess of art manifested; all that
seemed to have been done, might have been done here--with such
natural 'capabilities' (as they have it in the books on Landscape
Gardening)--with very little labour and expense.  No; it was not
the amount but the character of the art which caused me to take a
seat on one of the blossomy stones and gaze up and down this
fairy-like avenue for half an hour or more in bewildered
admiration.  One thing became more and more evident the longer I
gazed: an artist, and one with a most scrupulous eye for form,
had superintended all these arrangements.  The greatest care had
been taken to preserve a due medium between the neat and graceful
on the one hand, and the pittoresco, in the true sense of the
Italian term, on the other.  There were few straight, and no long
uninterrupted lines.  The same effect of curvature or of colour,
appeared twice, usually, but not oftener, at any one point of
view.  Everywhere was variety in uniformity.  It was a piece of
'composition', in which the most fastidiously critical taste
could scarcely have suggested an emendation.
     I had turned to the right as I entered the road, and now,
arising, I continued in the same direction.  The path was so
serpentine, that at no moment could I trace its course for more
than two or three paces in advance.  Its character did not
undergo any material change.
     Presently the murmur of water fell gently upon my ear--and
in a few moments afterwards, as I turned with the road somewhat
more abruptly than hitherto, I became aware that a building of
some kind lay at the foot of a gentle declivity just before me. 
I could see nothing distinctly on account of the mist which
occupied all the little valley below.  A gentle breeze, however,
now arose, as the sun was about descending; and while I remained
standing on the brow of the slope, the fog gradually became
dissipated into wreaths, and so floated over the scene.
     As it came fully into view--thus gradually as I describe it-
-piece by piece, here a tree, there a glimpse of water, and here
again the summit of a chimney, I could scarcely help fancying
that the whole was one of the ingenious illusions sometimes
exhibited under the name of 'vanishing pictures'.
     By the time, however, that the fog had thoroughly
disappeared, the sun had made its way down behind the gentle
hills, and thence, as if with a slight chassez to the south, had
come again fully into sight; glaring with a purplish lustre
through a chasm that entered the valley from the west.  Suddenly,
therefore--and as if by the hand of magic--this whole valley and
everything in it became brilliantly visible.
     The first coup d'oeil, as the sun slid into the position
described, impressed me very much as I have been impressed when a
boy, by the concluding scene of some well-arranged theatrical
spectacle or melodrama.  Not even the monstrosity of colour was
wanting; for the sunlight came out through the chasm, tinted all
orange and purple; while the vivid green of the grass in the
valley was reflected more or less upon all objects, from the
curtain of vapour that still hung overhead, as if loth to take
its total departure from a scene so enchantingly beautiful.
     The little vale into which I thus peered down from under the
fog-canopy, could not have been more than four hundred yards
long; while in breadth it varied from fifty to one hundred and
fifty, or perhaps two hundred.  It was most narrow at its
northern extremity, opening out as it tended southwardly, but
with no very precise regularity.  The widest portion was within
eighty yards of the southern extreme.  The slopes which
encompassed the vale could not fairly be called hills, unless at
their northern face.  Here a precipitous ledge of granite arose
to a height of some ninety feet; and, as I have mentioned, the
valley at this point was not more than fifty feet wide; but as
the visitor proceeded southwardly from this cliff, he found on
his right hand and on his left, declivities at once less high,
less precipitous, and less rocky.  All, in a word, sloped and
softened to the south; and yet the whole vale was engirdled by
eminences, more or less high, except at two points.  One of these
I have already spoken of.  It lay considerably to the north of
west, and was where the setting sun made its way, as I have
before described, into the amphitheatre, through a cleanly-cut
natural cleft in the granite embankment; this fissure might have
been ten yards wide at its widest point, so far as the eye could
trace it.  It seemed to lead up, up like a natural causeway, into
the recesses of unexplored mountains and forests.  The other
opening was directly at the southern end of the vale.  Here,
generally, the slopes were nothing more than gentle inclinations,
extending from east to west about one hundred and fifty yards. 
In the middle of this extent was a depression, level with the
ordinary floor of the valley.  As regards vegetation, as well as
in respect to everything else, the scene softened and sloped to
the south.  To the north--on the craggy precipice--a few paces
from the verge--upsprang the magnificent trunks of numerous
hickories, black walnuts, and chestnuts, interspersed with
occasional oak; and the strong lateral branches thrown out by the
walnuts especially, spread far over the edge of the cliff. 
Proceeding southwardly, the explorer saw, at first, the same
class of trees, but less and less lofty and Salvatorish in
character; then he saw the gentler elm, succeeded by the
sassafras and locust--these again by the softer linden, red-bud,
catalpa, and maple--these yet again by still more graceful and
modest varieties.  The whole face of the southern declivity was
covered with wild shrubbery alone--an occasional silver willow or
white poplar excepted.  In the bottom of the valley itself--(for
it must be borne in mind that the vegetation hitherto mentioned
grew only on the cliffs or hill-sides)--were to be seen three
insulated trees.  One was an elm of fine size and exquisite form:
it stood guard over the southern gate of the vale.  Another was a
hickory, much larger than the elm, and altogether a much finer
tree, although both were exceedingly beautiful: it seemed to have
taken charge of the north-western entrance, springing from a
group of rocks in the very jaws of the ravine, and throwing its
graceful body, at an angle of nearly forty-five degrees, far out
into the sunshine of the amphitheatre.  About thirty yards east
of this tree stood, however, the pride of the valley, and beyond
all question the most magnificent tree I have ever seen, unless,
perhaps, among the cypresses of the Itchiatuckanee.  It was a
triple-stemmed tulip tree--the Liriodendron Tulipiferum--one of
the natural order of magnolias.  Its three trunks separated from
the parent at about three feet from the soil, and diverging very
slightly and gradually, were not more than four feet apart at the
point where the largest stem shot out into foliage: this was at
an elevation of about eighty feet.  The whole height of the
principal division was one hundred and twenty feet.  Nothing can
surpass in beauty the form, or the glossy, vivid green of the
leaves of the tulip tree.  In the present instance they were
fully eight inches wide; but their glory was altogether eclipsed
by the gorgeous splendour of the profuse blossoms.  Conceive,
closely congregated, a million of the largest and most
resplendent tulips!  Only thus can the reader get any idea of the
picture I would convey.  And then the stately grace of the clean,
delicately-granulated columnar stems, the largest four feet in
diameter, at twenty from the ground.  The innumerable blossoms,
mingling with those of other trees scarcely less beautiful,
although infinitely less majestic, filled the valley with more
than Arabian perfumes.
     The general floor of the amphitheatre was grass of the same
character as that I had found in the road: if anything, more
deliciously soft, thick, velvety, and miraculously green.  It was
hard to conceive how all this beauty had been attained.
     I have spoken of the two openings into the vale.  From the
one to the north-west issued a rivulet, which came, gently
murmuring and slightly foaming, down the ravine, until it dashed
against the group of rocks out of which sprang the insulated
hickory.  Here, after encircling the tree, it passed on a little
to the north of east, leaving the tulip tree some twenty feet to
the south, and making no decided alteration in its course until
it came near the midway between the eastern and western
boundaries of the valley.  At this point, after a series of
sweeps, it turned off at right angles and pursued a generally
southern direction--meandering as it went--until it became lost
in a small lake of irregular figure (although roughly oval), that
lay gleaming near the lower extremity of the vale.  This lakelet
was, perhaps, a hundred yards in diameter at its widest part.  No
crystal could be clearer than its water.  Its bottom, which could
be distinctly seen, consisted altogether of pebbles brilliantly
white.  Its banks, of the emerald grass already described,
rounded, rather than sloped, off into the clear heaven below; and
so clear was this heaven, so perfectly, at times, did it reflect
all objects above it, that where the true bank ended and where
the mimic one commenced, it was a point of no little difficulty
to determine.  The trout, and some other varieties of fish, with
which this pond seemed to be almost inconveniently crowded, had
all the appearance of veritably flying-fish.  It was almost
impossible to believe that they were not absolutely suspended in
the air.  A light birch canoe that lay placidly on the water, was
reflected in its minutest fibres with a fidelity unsurpassed by
the most exquisitely polished mirror.  A small island, fairly
laughing with flowers in full bloom, and affording little more
space than just enough for a picturesque little building,
seemingly a fowl-house--arose from the lake not far from its
northern shore--to which it was connected by means of an
inconceivably light-looking and yet very primitive bridge.  It
was formed of a single, broad and thick plank of the tulip wood. 
This was forty feet long, and spanned the interval between shore
and shore with a slight but very perceptible arch, preventing all
oscillation.  From the southern extreme of the lake issued a
continuation of the rivulet, which, after meandering for,
perhaps, thirty yards, finally passed through the 'depression'
(already described) in the middle of the southern declivity, and
tumbling down a sheer precipice of a hundred feet, made its
devious and unnoticed way to the Hudson.
     The lake was deep--at some points thirty feet--but the
rivulet seldom exceeded three, while its greatest width was about
eight.  Its bottom and banks were as those of the pond--if a
defect could have been attributed to them, in point of
picturesqueness, it was that of excessive neatness.
     The expanse of the green turf was relieved, here and there,
by an occasional showy shrub, such as the hydrangea, or the
common snow-ball, or the aromatic seringa; or, more frequently,
by a clump of geraniums blossoming gorgeously in great varieties. 
These latter grew in pots which were carefully buried in the
soil, so as to give the plants the appearance of being
indigenous.  Besides all this, the lawn's velvet was exquisitely
spotted with sheep--a considerable flock of which roamed about
the vale, in company with three tamed deer, and a vast number of
brilliantly-plumed ducks.  A very large mastiff seemed to be in
vigilant attendance upon these animals, each and all.
     Along the eastern and western cliffs--where, towards the
upper portion of the amphitheatre, the boundaries were more or
less precipitous--grew ivy in great profusion--so that only here
and there could even a glimpse of the naked rock be obtained. 
The northern precipice, in like manner, was almost entirely
clothed by grape-vines of rare luxuriance; some springing from
the soil at the base of the cliff, and others from ledges on its
face.
     The slight elevation which formed the lower boundary of this
little domain, was crowned by a neat stone wall, of sufficient
height to prevent the escape of the deer.  Nothing of the fence
kind was observable elsewhere; for nowhere else was an artificial
enclosure needed:-