*******************************************************************************
[Title:Captivity and Restoration]
[Author:Mrs. Mary Rowlandson]
[Scanned:*]
[Checked:*]
[ID:*]
[Revision:*]
[Source:Gutenberg]
[Copyright:Public Domain - Copyright Expired]
[Category:*]
[Abstract:*]
*******************************************************************************





Narrative of the Captivity and Restoration of Mrs. Mary Rowlandson




The sovereignty and goodness of GOD, together with the
faithfulness of his promises displayed, being a narrative of the
captivity and restoration of Mrs. Mary Rowlandson, commended by
her, to all that desires to know the Lord's doings to, and
dealings with her.  Especially to her dear children and
relations.  The second Addition [sic] Corrected and amended.
Written by her own hand for her private use, and now made public
at the earnest desire of some friends, and for the benefit of
the afflicted.  Deut. 32.39.  See now that I, even I am he, and
there is no god with me, I kill and I make alive, I wound and I
heal, neither is there any can deliver out of my hand.


On the tenth of February 1675, came the Indians with great
numbers upon Lancaster:  their first coming was about sunrising;
hearing the noise of some guns, we looked out; several houses
were burning, and the smoke ascending to heaven.  There were
five persons taken in one house; the father, and the mother and
a sucking child, they knocked on the head; the other two they
took and carried away alive.  There were two others, who being
out of their garrison upon some occasion were set upon; one was
knocked on the head, the other escaped; another there was who
running along was shot and wounded, and fell down; he begged of
them his life, promising them money (as they told me) but they
would not hearken to him but knocked him in head, and stripped
him naked, and split open his bowels.  Another, seeing many of
the Indians about his barn, ventured and went out, but was
quickly shot down.  There were three others belonging to the
same garrison who were killed; the Indians getting up upon the
roof of the barn, had advantage to shoot down upon them over
their fortification.  Thus these murderous wretches went on,
burning, and destroying before them.

At length they came and beset our own house, and quickly it was
the dolefulest day that ever mine eyes saw.  The house stood
upon the edge of a hill; some of the Indians got behind the
hill, others into the barn, and others behind anything that
could shelter them; from all which places they shot against the
house, so that the bullets seemed to fly like hail; and quickly
they wounded one man among us, then another, and then a third.
About two hours (according to my observation, in that amazing
time) they had been about the house before they prevailed to
fire it (which they did with flax and hemp, which they brought
out of the barn, and there being no defense about the house,
only two flankers at two opposite corners and one of them not
finished); they fired it once and one ventured out and quenched
it, but they quickly fired it again, and that took.  Now is the
dreadful hour come, that I have often heard of (in time of war,
as it was the case of others), but now mine eyes see it.  Some
in our house were fighting for their lives, others wallowing in
their blood, the house on fire over our heads, and the bloody
heathen ready to knock us on the head, if we stirred out.  Now
might we hear mothers and children crying out for themselves,
and one another, "Lord, what shall we do?"  Then I took my
children (and one of my sisters', hers) to go forth and leave
the house:  but as soon as we came to the door and appeared, the
Indians shot so thick that the bullets rattled against the
house, as if one had taken an handful of stones and threw them,
so that we were fain to give back.  We had six stout dogs
belonging to our garrison, but none of them would stir, though
another time, if any Indian had come to the door, they were
ready to fly upon him and tear him down.  The Lord hereby would
make us the more acknowledge His hand, and to see that our help
is always in Him.  But out we must go, the fire increasing, and
coming along behind us, roaring, and the Indians gaping before
us with their guns, spears, and hatchets to devour us.  No
sooner were we out of the house, but my brother-in-law (being
before wounded, in defending the house, in or near the throat)
fell down dead, whereat the Indians scornfully shouted, and
hallowed, and were presently upon him, stripping off his
clothes, the bullets flying thick, one went through my side, and
the same (as would seem) through the bowels and hand of my dear
child in my arms.  One of my elder sisters' children, named
William, had then his leg broken, which the Indians perceiving,
they knocked him on [his] head.  Thus were we butchered by those
merciless heathen, standing amazed, with the blood running down
to our heels.  My eldest